# Hackers & Cyber Attacks
[Video Link](https://youtu.be/_GzE99AmAQU)

Not all [hackers](../glossary/README.md#security-hacker) are malicious - there are hackers who hunt for bugs and try to close security holes in software to make systems safer and more resilient. They are often hired by companies and governments to perform security evaluations on computer systems and [networks](../glossary/README.md#computer-network). These hackers are known as [White Hats](../glossary/README.md#white-hat). On the flip-side are the [Black Hats](../glossary/README.md#black-hat), malicious hackers with intentions to steal, exploit, and sell computer vulnerabilities and data.

Hackers' motivations differ wildly: some hack for amusement and curiosity, while [cybercriminals](../glossary/README.md#cybercrime) hack most often for monetary gain. And then there are [hacktivists](../glossary/README.md#hacktivism), who use their skill to promote a social or political goal.

The most common way hackers get into computer systems isn't by hacking at all; it's by tricking users into letting them in. This is called [social engineering](../glossary/README.md#social-engineering), where a person is manipulated into divulging confidential information, or configuring a computer system so that it permits entry by attackers.

The most common type of attack is [phishing](../glossary/README.md#phishing), which is most oftened encountered as an email asking the recipient to login to an account on a website. The user is asked to click a link in the email which takes them to a site that looks legitimate to the casual observer, but is actually a malicious site that is designed to look like the expected website. When a user inputs information on this malicious site, that credentials are sent straight to the hackers. Even with a 0.1% success rate a million phishing emails may yield 1,000 compromised accounts.

Another social engineering attack is pretexting, where attackers contact an organization and pretend to be from their IT department. Often attackers will call a first number and then ask to be transferred to a second so that the phone number appears to be internal to the company. From there the attacker can instruct an unwitting user to configure their computer in a compromising way or get the user to reveal confidential details, like passwords or network configurations.

Emails are also a common delivery mechanism for [trojan horses](../glossary/README.md#trojan-horse), programs that masquerade as harmless attachments (like a photo or invoice) but actually contain malicious software, called [malware](../glossary/README.md#malware). Malware can take many forms: some may steal data like banking credentials, others may encrypt the files on the system and demand a ransom - what's known as [ransomware](../glossary/README.md#ransomware).

If an attacker cannot run malware or get a user to let them in, they have to force their way in through other means. One method is to [brute force](../glossary/README.md#brute-force-attack) a password. Most modern systems defend against this type of attack by having a user wait incrementally longer periods of time following each failed login attempt, or even lock a user out entirely after a certain number of attempts. One recent hack to get around this countermeasure is called _NAND Mirroring_, where if an attacker has physical access to a computer, they can attach wires to the device's memory chip to make a perfect copy of its contents. With this setup an attacker can try a series of passwords until the device triggers the delays - when this happens the attacker can reflash the memory with the copy made, essentially resetting the device and allowing more password attempts without having to wait. This technique was shown to be successful on an iPhone 5C, but many newer devices include mechanisms to thwart this type of attack. 

Without physical access to a device, an attacker has to find a way to hack it remotely, like over the internet. In general this requires an attacker to find and take advantage of a bug in a system. Successfully utilizing a bug to gain capabilities or access is called an [exploit](../glossary/README.md#exploit).

One common type of exploit is a [buffer overlow](../glossary/README.md#buffer-overflow). _Buffers_ are a general term for a block of memory reserved for storing data. When input from the user exceeds the buffer allocation for that data, it will cause that data to overflow the allocated memory - sometimes this will just cause a program or [operating system](../glossary/README.md#operating-system) to crash (because important values are overwritten with trash data). Attackers can attack this sort of bug more cleverly by  injecting purposeful new values into a program's memory. With the ability to arbitraily manipulate a program's memory, hackers can bypass things like login prompts, and sometimes even use that program to hijack the whole system. There are many methods to combat buffer overflow attacks. The easiest is to always test the length of input before opying it into a buffer, called [bounds checking](../glossary/README.md#bounds-checking). Many modern programming languages implement bounds checking automatically. Programs can also randomize the memory location of variables so that hackers don't know which memory location to overwrite and are more likely to crash the program than gain access. Programs can always leave unused space after buffers and monitor those values to see if they change; if they do, it is likely an attacker is tampering around with memory. These regions are called _canaries_, named after the small birds miners used to take underground to warn them of dangerous conditions.

Another classic hack is [code injection](../glossary/README.md#code-injection). It is most commonly used to attack websites that use databases, which pretty much all big websites do. This attack is carried out by passing in malicious code through user input fields that can be destructive when passed through dynamically into database queries. Almost all servers today have defenses against simple code injection. With more sophisticated attacks it's possible to add records to the database (like a new administrator account) or even get the database to reveal data, allowing hackers to steal information like credit card numbers, social security numbers, and so forth. As with buffer overflow vulnerabilities, programmers should always assume input coming from outside the system to be potentially dangerous, and to handle it with care. Most username and password forms on the web today do not allow special characters like semi-colons or quotes as a first level of defense. Good servers will also _sanitize_ input by removing or modifying special characters before running database queries.

Working exploits are often sold or shared online. The more prevalent the bug, or the more damaging the exploit, the higher the price or prestige it commands. Even governments sometimes buy exploits which allow them to compromise computers for purposes like spying. When a new exploitable bug is discovered that the software creators are not aware of it is known as a [zero day vulnerability](../glossary/README.md#zero-day). Black Hat hackers rush to use the exploit for maximum benefit before White Hat programmers release a patch for the bug. This is why it is important to keep computer software up to date - a lot of updates contain security patches.

If bugs are left open on enough systems it allows hackers to write a program that jump from computer to computer automatically (these programs are called [worms](../glossary/README.md#computer-worm)). If a hacker can take over a large number of computers they can be used together, to form what's called a [botnet](../glossary/README.md#botnet). This botnet can have many purposes, like sending huge volumes of spam, mining cryptocurrencies using other people's computing resources, and launching [Distributed Denial of Service attacks](../glossary/README.md#denial-of-service-attack) (DDoS) against servers. DDoS is where all the computers in the botnet send a flood of dummy messages. This can knock services offline, either to force owners to pay a ransom, or just to be evil.

Despite all of the hard working White Hats, exploits documented online, and software engineering best practices, cyber attacks happen on a daily basis. They cost the global economy roughly half a trillion dollars annually, and that figure will only increase as the world becomes more reliant on computing systems. This is especially worrying to governments, as infrastructure is increasingly computer-driven (power plants, the electrical grid, traffic lights, water treatment plants, oil refineries, air traffic control, and many other key systems). Many experts predict that the next major war will be fought in cyberspace, where nations are brought to their knees not by physical attack, but rather crippled economically and infrastructurally through [cyberwarfare](../glossary/README.md#cyberwarfare).

| [Previous: Cybersecurity](../31/README.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md#table-of-contents) | [Next: Cryptography](../33/README.md) |
